When the miner comes up from the pit his face is so pale that it is
noticeable even through the mask of coal dust. This is due to the foul
air that he has been breathing, and will wear off presently. To a
Southerner, new to the mining districts, the spectacle of a shift of
several hundred miners streaming out of the pit is strange and slightly
sinister. Then-exhausted faces, with the grime clinging in all the
hollows, have a fierce, wild look. At other times, when their faces are
clean, there is not much to distinguish them from the rest of the
population. They have a very upright square-shouldered walk, a reaction
from the constant bending underground, but most of them are shortish men
and their thick ill-fitting clothes hide the splendour of their bodies.
The most definitely distinctive thing about them is the blue scars on
their noses. Every miner has blue scars on his nose and forehead, and
will carry them to his death. The coal dust of which the air underground
is full enters every cut, and then the skin grows over it and forms a
blue stain like tattooing, which in fact it is. Some of the older men
have their foreheads veined like Roquefort cheeses from this cause.

As soon as the miner comes above ground he gargles a little water to get
the worst of the coal dust out of his throat and nostrils, and then goes
home and either washes or does not wash according to his temperament.
From what I have seen I should say that a majority of miners prefer to
eat their meal first and wash afterwards, as I should do in their
circumstances. It is the normal thing to see a miner sitting down to his
tea with a Christy-minstrel face, completely black except for very red
lips which become clean by eating. After his meal he takes a largish
basin of water and washes very methodically, first his hands, then his
chest, neck, and armpits, then his forearms, then his face and scalp (it
is on the scalp that the grime clings thickest), and then his wife takes
the flannel and washes his back. He has only washed the top half of his
body and probably his navel is still a nest of coal dust, but even so it
takes some skill to get pass-ably clean in a single basin of water. For
my own part I found I needed two complete baths after going down a
coal-mine. Getting the dirt out of one's eyelids is a ten minutes' job
in itself.

At some of the larger and better appointed collieries there are pithead
baths. This is an enormous advantage, for not only can the miner wash
himself all over every day, in comfort and even luxury, but at the baths
he has two lockers where he can keep his pit clothes separate from his
day clothes, so that within twenty minutes of emerging as black as a
Negro he can be riding off to a football match dressed up to the nines.
But it is only comparatively seldom because a seam of coal does not last
for ever, so that it is not necessarily worth building a bath every time
a shaft is sunk. I can-not get hold of exact figures, but it seems
likely that rather less than one miner in three has access to a pithead
bath. Probably a large majority of miners are completely black from the
waist down for at least six days a week. It is almost impossible for
them to wash all over in their own homes. Every drop of water has got to
be heated up, and in a tiny living-room which contains, apart from the
kitchen range and a quantity of furniture, a wife, some children, and
probably a dog, there is simply not room to have a proper bath. Even
with a basin one is bound to splash the furniture. Middle-class people
are fond of saying that the miners would not wash themselves properly
even if they could, but this is nonsense, as is shown by the fact that
where pithead baths exist practically all the men use them. Only among
the very old men does the belief still linger that washing one's legs
'causes lumbago'. Moreover the pithead baths, where they exist, are paid
for wholly or partly by the miners themselves, out of the Miners'
Welfare Fund. Sometimes the colliery company subscribes, some-times the
Fund bears the whole cost. But doubtless even at this late date the old
ladies in Brighton boarding-houses are saying that 'if you give those
miners baths they only use them to keep coal in'.

As a matter of fact it is surprising that miners wash as regularly as
they do, seeing how little time they have between work and sleep. It is
a great mistake to think of a miner's working day as being only seven
and a half hours. Seven and a half hours is the time spent actually on
the job, but, as I have already explained, one has got to add on to this
time taken up in 'travelling', which is seldom less than an hour and may
often be three hours. In addition most miners have to spend a
considerable time in getting to and from the pit. Throughout the
industrial districts there is an acute shortage of houses, and it is
only in the small mining villages, where the village is grouped round
the pit, that the men can be certain of living near their work. In the
larger mining towns where I have stayed, nearly everyone went to work by
bus; half a crown a week seemed to be the normal amount to spend on
fares. One miner I stayed with was working on the morning shift, which
was from six in the morning till half past one. He had to be out of bed
at a quarter to four and got back somewhere after three in the
afternoon. In another house where I stayed a boy of fifteen was working
on the night shift. He left for work at nine at night and got back at
eight in the morning, had his breakfast, and then promptly went to bed
and slept till six in the evening; so that his leisure time amounted to,
about four hours a day--actually a good deal less, if you take off the
time for washing, eating, and dressing.

The adjustments a miner's family have to make when he is changed from
one shift to another must be tiresome in the extreme. If he is on the
night shift he gets home in time for breakfast, on the morning shift he
gets home in the middle of the afternoon, and on the afternoon shift he
gets home in the middle of the night; and in each case, of course, he
wants his principal meal of the day as soon as he returns. I notice that
the Rev. W. R. Inge, in his book _England_, accuses the miners of
gluttony. From my own observation I should say that they eat
astonishingly little. Most of the miners I stayed with ate slightly less
than I did. Many of them declare that they cannot do their day's work if
they have had a heavy meal beforehand, and the food they take with them
is only a snack, usually bread-and-dripping and cold tea. They carry it
in a flat tin called a snap-can which they strap to their belts. When a
miner gets back late at night his wife waits up for him, but when he is
on the morning shift it seems to be the custom for him to get his
breakfast for himself. Apparently the old superstition that it is bad
luck to see a woman before going to work on the morning shift is not
quite extinct. In the old days, it is said, a miner who happened to meet
a woman in the early morning would often turn back and do no work that
day.

Before I had been in the coal areas I shared the wide-spread illusion
that miners are comparatively well paid. One hears it loosely stated
that a miner is paid ten or eleven shillings a shift, and one does a
small multiplication sum and concludes that every miner is earning round
about £2 a week or £150 a year. But the statement that a miner receives
ten or eleven shillings a shift is very misleading. To begin with, it is
only the actual coal 'getter' who is paid at this rate; a 'dataller',
for instance, who attends to the roofing, is paid at a lower rate,
usually eight or nine shillings a shift. Again, when the coal 'getter'
is paid piecework, so much per ton extracted, as is the case in many
mines, he is dependent on the quality of the coal; a breakdown in the
machinery or a 'fault'--that is, a streak of rock running through the
coal seam--may rob him of his earnings for a day or two at a time. But
in any case one ought not to think of the miner as working six days a
week, fifty-two weeks a year. Almost certainly there will be a number of
days when he is' laid off'. The average earning per shift worked for
every mine-worker, of all ages and both sexes, in Great Britain in 1934,
was 9s. 1 3/4d. [From the _Colliery Year Book_ and Coal Trades
Directory_ for 1935.] If everyone were in work all the time, this would
mean that the mine-worker was earning a little over £142 a year, or
nearly £2 15s. a week. His real income, however, is far lower than this,
for the 9s. 1 3/4d. is merely an average calculation on shifts actually
worked and takes no account of blank days.

I have before me five pay-checks belonging to a Yorkshire miner, for
five weeks (not consecutive) at the beginning of 1936. Averaging them
up, the gross weekly wages they represent is £2 15s. 2d.; this is an
average of nearly 9s. 2 1/2d. a shift. But these pay-checks are for the
winter, when nearly all mines are running full time. As spring advances
the coal trade slacks off and more and more men are 'temporarily
stopped', while others still technically in work are laid off for a day
or two in every week. It is obvious therefore that £150 or even £142 is
an immense over-estimate for the mine-worker's yearly income. As a
matter of fact, for the year 1934 the average gross earnings of all
miners through-out Great Britain was only £115 11s. 6d. It varied
consider-ably from district to district, rising as high as £133 2s. 8d.
in Scotland, while in Durham it was a little under £105 or barely more
than £2 a week. I take these figures from The Coal Scuttle, by Mr Joseph
Jones, Mayor of Barnsley, Yorkshire. Mr Jones adds:

These figures cover the earnings of youths as well as adults and of the
higher- as well as the lower-paid grades...any particularly high
earning would be included in these figures, as would the earnings of
certain officials and other higher-paid men as well as the higher
amounts paid for overtime work.

_The figures, being averages, fail...to reveal the position of thousands
of adult workers whose earnings were substantially below the average
and' who received only 30s. to 40s. or less per week._

Mr Jones's italics. But please notice that even these wretched earnings
are _gross_ earnings. On top of this there are all kinds of stoppages
which are deducted from the miner's wages every week. Here is a list of
weekly stoppages which was given me as typical in one Lancashire
district:

                                        s. d.

Insurance (unemployment and health)     1  5
Hire of lamp                               6
For sharpening tools                       6
Check-weighman                             9
Infirmary                                  2
Hospital                                   1
Benevolent Fund                            6
Union fees                                 6
                                        ----
Total                                    4 5
                                        ----

Some of these stoppages, such as the Benevolent Fund and the union fees,
are, so to speak, the miner's own responsibility, others are imposed by
the colliery company. They are not the same in all districts. For
instance, the iniquitous swindle of making the miner pay for the hire of
his lamp (at sixpence a week he buys the lamp several times over in a
single year) does not obtain everywhere. But the stoppages always seem
to total up to about the same amount. On the Yorkshire miner's five
pay-checks, the average gross earning per week is £2 15s. 2d.; the
average net earning, after the stoppages have come off, is only £2 11s.
4d.--a reduction of 3s. 10d. a week. But the pay-check, naturally, only
mentions stoppages which are imposed or paid through the colliery
company; one has got to add the union fees, bringing the total reduction
up to something over four shillings. Probably it is safe to say that
stoppages of one kind and another cut four shillings or thereabouts from
_every_ adult miner's weekly wage. So that the £115 11s. 6d. which was
the mine-worker's average earning throughout Great Britain in 1934
should really be something nearer £105. As against this, most miners
receive allowances in kind, being able to purchase coal for their own
use at a reduced rate, usually eight or nine shillings a ton. But
according to Mr Jones, quoted above, 'the average value of all
allowances in kind for the country as a whole is only fourpence a day'.
And this fourpence a day is offset, in many cases, by the amount the
miner has to spend on fares in getting to and from the pit. So, taking
the industry as a whole, the sum the miner can actually bring home and
call his own does not average more, perhaps slightly less, than two
pounds a week.

Meanwhile, how much coal is the average miner producing?

The tonnage of coal raised yearly per person employed in mining rises
steadily though rather slowly. In 1914 every mine-worker produced, on
average, 253 tons of coal; in 1934 he produced 280 tons.[_The Coal
Scuttle_. The _Colliery Year Book end Coal Trades Directory_ gives a
slightly higher figure.] This of course is an average figure for
mine-workers of all kinds; those actually working at the coal face
extract an enormously greater amount--in many cases, probably, well over
a thousand tons each. But taking 280 tons as a representative figure, it
is worth noticing what a vast achievement this is. One gets the best
idea of it by comparing a miner's life with somebody else's. If I live
to be sixty I shall probably have produced thirty novels, or enough to
fill two medium-sized library shelves. In the same period the average
miner produces 8400 tons of coal; enough coal to pave Trafalgar Square
nearly two feet deep or to supply seven large families with fuel for
over a hundred years.

Of the five pay-checks I mentioned above, no less than three are
rubber-stamped with the words 'death stoppage'. When a miner is killed
at work it is usual for the other miners to make up a subscription,
generally of a shilling each, for his widow, and this is collected by
the colliery company and automatically deducted from their wages. The
significant detail here is the rubber stamp. The rate of accidents among
miners is so high, compared with that in other trades, that casualties
are taken for granted almost as they would be in a minor war. Every year
one miner in about nine hundred is killed and one in about six is
injured; most of these injuries, of course, are petty ones, but a fair
number amount to total disablement. This means that if a miner's working
life is forty years the chances are nearly seven to one against his
escaping injury and not much more than twenty to one against his being
killed outright. No other trade approaches this in dangerousness; the
next most dangerous is the shipping trade, one sailor in a little under
1300 being killed every year. The figures I have given apply, of course,
to mine-workers as a whole; for those actually working underground the
proportion of injuries would be very much higher. Every miner of long
standing that I have talked to had either been in a fairly serious
accident himself or had seen some of his mates killed, and in every
mining family they tell you tales of fathers, brothers, or uncles killed
at work. ('And he fell seven hundred feet, and they wouldn't never have
collected t'pieces only he were wearing a new suit of oil-skins,' etc.,
etc., etc.) Some of these tales are appalling in the extreme. One miner,
for instance, described to me how a mate of his, a 'dataller', was
buried by a fall of rock. They rushed to him and managed to uncover his
head and shoulders so that he could breathe, and he was alive and spoke
to them. Then they saw that the roof was coming down again and had to
run to save themselves; the 'dataller' was buried a second time. Once
again they rushed to him and got his head and shoulders free, and again
he was alive and spoke to them. Then the roof came down a third time,
and this time they could not uncover him for several hours, after which,
of course, he was dead. But the miner who told me the story (he had been
buried himself on one occasion, but he was lucky enough to have his head
jammed between his legs so that there was a small space in which he
could breathe) did not think it was a particularly appalling one. Its
significance, for him, was that the 'dataller' had known perfectly well
that the place where he was working was unsafe, and had gone there in
daily expectation of an accident. 'And it worked on his mind to that
extent that he got to kissing his wife before he went to work. And she
told me afterwards that it were over twenty years since he'd kissed
her.'

The most obviously understandable cause of accidents is explosions of
gas, which is always more or less present in the atmosphere of the pit.
There is a special lamp which is used to test the air for gas, and when
it is present in at all large quantities it can be detected by the flame
of an ordinary Davy lamp burning blue. If the wick can be turned up to
its full extent and the flame is still blue, the proportion of gas is
dangerously high; it is, nevertheless, difficult to detect, because it
does not distribute itself evenly throughout the atmosphere but hangs
about in cracks and crevices. Before starting work a miner often tests
for gas by poking his lamp into all the corners. The gas may be touched
off by a spark during blasting operations, or by a pick striking a spark
from a stone, or by a defective lamp, or by 'gob fires'--spontaneously
generated fires which' smoulder in the coal dust and are very hard to
put out. The great mining disasters which happen from time to time, in
which several hundred men are killed, are usually caused by explosions;
hence one tends to think of explosions as the chief danger of mining.
Actually, the great majority of accidents are due to the normal
every-day dangers of the pit; in particular, to falls of roof. There
are, for instance, 'pot-holes'--circular holes from which a lump of
stone big enough to kill a man shoots out with the promptitude of a
bullet. With, so far as I can remember, only one exception, all the
miners I have talked to declared that the new machinery, and 'speeding
up' generally, have made the work more dangerous. This may be partly due
to conservatism, but they can give plenty of reasons. To begin with, the
speed at which the coal is now extracted means that for hours at a time
a dangerously large stretch of roof remains unpropped. Then there is the
vibration, which tends to shake everything loose, and the noise, which
makes it harder to detect signs of danger. One must remember that a
miner's safety underground depend largely on his own care and skill. An
experienced miner claims to know by a sort of instinct when the roof is
unsafe; the way he puts it is that he 'can feel the weight on him'. He
can, for instance, hear the faint creaking of the props. The reason why
wooden props are still generally preferred to iron girders is that a
wooden prop which is about to collapse gives warning by creaking,
whereas a girder flies out un-expectedly. The devastating noise of the
machines makes it impossible to hear anything else, and thus the danger
is increased.

When a miner is hurt it is of course impossible to attend to him
immediately. He lies crushed under several hundred-weight of stone in
some dreadful cranny underground, and even after he has been extricated
it is necessary to drag his body a mile or more, perhaps, through
galleries where nobody can stand upright. Usually when you talk to a man
who has been injured you find that it was a couple of hours or so before
they got him to the surface. Sometimes, of course, there are accidents
to the cage. The cage is shooting several yards up or down at the speed
of an express train, and it is operated by somebody on the surface who
cannot see what is happening. He has very delicate indicators to tell
him how far the cage has got, but it is possible for him to make a
mistake, and there have been cases of the cage crashing into the
pit-bottom at its very maximum speed. This seems to me a dreadful way to
die. For as that tiny steel box whizzes through the blackness there must
come a moment when the ten men who are locked inside it _know_ that
something has gone wrong; and the remaining seconds before they are
smashed to pieces hardly bear thinking about. A miner told me he was
once in a cage in which something went wrong. It did not slow up when it
should have done, and they thought the cable must have snapped. As it
happened they got to the bottom safely, but when he stepped out he found
that he had broken a tooth; he had been clenching his teeth so hard in
expectation of that frightful crash.

Apart from accidents miners seem to be healthy, as obviously they have
got to be, considering the muscular efforts demanded of them. They are
liable to rheumatism and a man with defective lungs does not last long
in that dust-impregnated air, but the most characteristic industrial
disease is nystagmus. This is a disease of the eyes which makes the
eyeballs oscillate in a strange manner when they come near a light. It
is due presumably to working in half-darkness, and sometimes results in
total blindness. Miners who are disabled in this way or any other way
are compensated by the colliery company, sometimes with a lump sum,
sometimes with a weekly pension. This pension never amounts to more than
twenty-nine shillings a week; if it falls below fifteen shillings the
disabled man can also get something from the dole or the P.A.C. If I
were a disabled miner I should very much prefer the lump sum, for then
at any rate I should know that I had got my money. Disability pensions
are not guaranteed by any centralized fund, so that if the colliery
company goes bankrupt that is the end of the disabled miner's pension,
though he does figure among the other creditors.

In Wigan I stayed for a while with a miner who was suffering from
nystagmus. He could see across the room but not much further. He had
been drawing compensation of twenty-nine shillings a week for the past
nine months, but the colliery company were now talking of putting him on
'partial compensation' of fourteen shillings a week. It all depended on
whether the doctor passed him as fit for light work 'on top'. Even if
the doctor did pass him there would, needless to say, be no light work
available, but he could draw the dole and the company would have saved
itself fifteen shillings a week. Watching this man go to the colliery to
draw his compensation, I was struck by the profound differences that are
still made by _status_. Here was a man who had been half blinded in one
of the most useful of all jobs and was drawing a pension to which he had
a perfect right, if anybody has a right to anything. Yet he could not,
so to speak, _demand_ this pension--he could not, for instance, draw it
when and how he wanted it. He had to go to the colliery once a week at a
time named by the company, and when he got there he was kept waiting
about for hours in the cold wind. For all I know he was also expected to
touch his cap and show gratitude to whoever paid him; at any rate he had
to waste an afternoon and spend sixpence in bus fares. It is very
different for a member of the bourgeoisie, even such a down-at-heel
member as I am. Even when I am on the verge of starvation I have certain
rights attaching to my bourgeois status. I do not earn much more than a
miner earns, but I do at least get it paid into my bank in a
gentle-manly manner and can draw it out when I choose. And even when my
account is exhausted the bank people are passably polite.

This business of petty inconvenience and indignity, of being kept
waiting about, of having to do everything at other people's convenience,
is inherent in working-class life. A thousand influences constantly
press a working man down into a passive role. He does not act, he is
acted upon. He feels himself the slave of mysterious authority and has a
firm conviction that 'they' will never allow him to do this, that, and
the other. Once when I was hop-picking I asked the sweated pickers (they
earn something under sixpence an hour) why they did not form a union. I
was told immediately that 'they' would never allow it. Who were 'they'?
I asked. Nobody seemed to know, but evidently 'they' were omnipotent.

A person of bourgeois origin goes through life with some expectation of
getting what he wants, within reasonable limits. Hence the fact that in
times of stress 'educated' people tend to come to the front; they are no
more gifted than the others and their 'education' is generally quite
useless in itself, but they are accustomed to a certain amount of
deference and consequently have the cheek necessary to a commander. That
they will come to the front seems to be taken for granted, always and
everywhere. In Lissagaray's _History of the Commune_ there is an
interesting passage describing the shootings that took place after the
Commune had been suppressed. The authorities were shooting the
ringleaders, and as they did not know who the ringleaders were, they
were picking them out on the principle that those of better class would
be the ringleaders. An officer walked down a line of prisoners, picking
out likely-looking types. One man was shot because he was wearing a
watch, another because he 'had an intelligent face'. I should not like
to be shot for having an intelligent face, but I do agree that in almost
any revolt the leaders would tend to be people who could pronounce their
aitches.