AS you walk through the industrial towns you lose yourself in labyrinths
of little brick houses blackened by smoke, festering in planless chaos
round miry alleys and little cindered yards where there are stinking
dust-bins and lines of grimy washing and half-ruinous w.c.s. The
interiors of these houses are always very much the same, though the
number of rooms varies between two or five. All have an almost exactly
similar living-room, ten or fifteen feet square, with an open kitchen
range; in the larger ones there is a scullery as well, in the smaller
ones the sink and copper are in the living-room. At the back there is
the yard, or part of a yard shared by a number of houses, just big
enough for the dustbin and the w.c.s. Not a single one has hot water
laid on. You might walk, I suppose, through literally hundreds of miles
of streets inhabited by miners, every one of whom, when he is in work,
gets black from head to foot every day, without ever passing a house in
which one could have a bath. It would have been very simple to install a
hot-water system working from the kitchen range, but the builder saved
perhaps ten pounds on each house by not doing so, and at the time when
these houses were built no one imagined that miners wanted baths.

For it is to be noted that the majority of these houses are old, fifty
or sixty years old at least, and great numbers of them are by any
ordinary standard not fit for human habitation. They go on being
tenanted simply because there are no others to be had. And that is the
central fact about housing in the industrial areas: not that the houses
are poky and ugly, and insanitary and comfortless, or that they are
distributed in incredibly filthy slums round belching foundries and
stinking canals and slag-heaps that deluge them with sulphurous
smoke--though all this is perfectly true--but simply that there are not
enough houses to go round.

'Housing shortage' is a phrase that has been bandied about pretty freely
since the war, but it means very little to anyone with an income of more
than £10 a week, or even £5 a week for that matter. Where rents are high
the difficulty is not to find houses but to find tenants. Walk down any
street in Mayfair and you will see 'To Let' boards in half the windows.
But in the industrial areas the mere difficulty of getting hold of a
house is one of the worst aggravations of poverty. It means that people
will put up with anything--any hole and corner slum, any misery of bugs
and rotting floors and cracking walls, any extortion of skinflint
landlords and blackmailing agents--simply to get a roof over their
heads. I have been into appalling houses, houses in which I would not
live a week if you paid me, and found that the tenants had been there
twenty and thirty years and only hoped they might have the luck to die
there. In general these conditions are taken as a matter of course,
though not always. Some people hardly seem to realize that such things
as decent houses exist and look on bugs and leaking roofs as acts of
God; others rail bitterly against their landlords; but all cling
desperately to their houses lest worse should befall. So long as the
housing shortage continues the local authorities cannot do much to make
existing houses more liveable. They can 'condemn' a house, but they
cannot order it to be pulled down till the tenant has another house to
go to; and so the condemned houses remain standing and are all the worse
for being condemned, because naturally the landlord will not spend more
than he can help on a house which is going to be demolished sooner or
later. In a town like Wigan, for instance, there are over two thousand
houses standing which have been condemned for years, and whole sections
of the town would be condemned en bloc if there were any hope of other
houses being built to replace them. Towns like Leeds and Sheffield have
scores of thousands of 'back to back' houses which are all of a
condemned type but will remain standing for decades.

I have inspected great numbers of houses in various mining towns and
villages and made notes on their essential points. I think I can best
give an idea of what conditions are like by transcribing a few extracts
from my notebook, taken more or less at random. They are only brief
notes and they will need certain explanations which I will give
afterwards. Here are a few from Wigan:


1. House in Wallgate quarter. Blind back type. One up, one down.
Living-room measures 12 ft by 10 ft, room upstairs the same. Alcove
under stairs measuring 5 ft by 5 ft and serving as larder, scullery, and
coal-hole. Windows will open. Distance to lavatory 50 yards. Rent 4s.
9d., rates 2s. 6d., total 7s. 3d.

2. Another near by. Measurements as above, but no alcove under stairs,
merely a recess two feet deep containing the sink--no room for larder,
etc. Rent 3s. 2d., rates 2s., total 5s. 2d.

3. House in Scholes quarter. Condemned house. One up, one down. Rooms 15
ft by 15 ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs.
Floor subsiding. No windows will open. House decently dry. Landlord
good. Rent 3s. 8d. rates 2s. 6d., total 6s. 2d.

4. Another near by. Two up, two down, and coal-hole. Walls falling
absolutely to pieces. Water comes into upstairs rooms in quantities.
Floor lopsided. Downstairs windows will not open. Landlord bad. Rent
6s., rates 3s. 6d., total 9s. 6d.

5. House in Greenough's Row. One up, two down. Living-room 13 ft by 8
ft. Walls coming apart and water comes in. Back windows will not open,
front ones will. Ten in family with eight children very near together in
age. Corporations are trying to evict them for overcrowding but cannot
find another house to send them to. Landlord bad. Rent 4s., rates 2s.
3d., total 6s. 3d.


So much for Wigan. I have pages more of the same type. Here is one from
Sheffield--a typical specimen of Sheffield's several score thousand
'back to back' houses:


House in Thomas Street. Back to back, two up, one down (i.e. a
three-storey house with one room on each storey). Cellar below.
Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, and rooms above corresponding. Sink in
living-room. Top floor has no door but gives on open stairs, Walls in
living-room slightly damp, walls in top rooms coming to pieces and
oozing damp on all sides. House is so dark that light has to be kept
burning all day. Electricity estimated at 6d. a day (probably an
exaggeration). Six in family, parents and foul children. Husband (on
P.A.C.) is tuberculous. One child in hospital, the others appear
healthy. Tenants have been seven years in this house. Would move, but no
other house available. Rent 6s. 6d., rates included.


Here are one or two from Barnsley:


1. House in Wortley Street. Two up, one down. Living-room 12 ft by 10
ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs. Sink worn
almost flat and constantly overflowing. Walls not too sound. Penny in
slot gas-light. House very dark and gas-light estimated 4d. a day.
Upstairs rooms are really one large room partitioned into two. Walls
very bad--wall of back room cracked right through. Window-frames coming
to pieces and have to be stuffed with wood. Rain comes through in
several places. Sewer runs under house and stinks in summer but
Corporation 'says they can't do nowt'. Six people in house, two adults
and four children, the eldest aged fifteen. Youngest but one attending
hospital--tuberculosis suspected. House infested by bugs. Rent 5s. 3d.,
including rates.

2. House in Peel Street. Back to back, two up, two down and large
cellar. Living-room loft square with copper and sink. The other
downstairs room the same size, probably intended as par-lour but used as
bedroom. Upstairs rooms the same size as those below. Living-room very
dark. Gas-light estimated at 4 1/2d. a day. Distance to lavatory 70
yards. Four beds in house for eight people--two old parents, two adult
girls (the eldest aged twenty-seven), one young man, and three children.
Parents have one bed, eldest son another, and remaining five people
share the other two. Bugs very bad--'You can't keep 'em down when it's
'ot.' Indescribable squalor in downstairs room and smell upstairs almost
unbearable. Rent 5s. 7 1/2d., including rates.

3. House in Mapplewell (small mining village near Barnsley). Two up, one
down. Living-room 14 ft by 13 ft. Sink in living-room. Plaster cracking
and coming off walls. No shelves in oven. Gas leaking slightly. The
upstairs rooms each 10 ft by 8 ft. Four beds (for six persons, all
adult), but 'one bed does nowt', presumably for lack of bedclothes. Room
nearest stairs has no door and stairs have no banister, so that when you
step out of bed your foot hangs in vacancy and you may fall ten feet on
to stones. Dry rot so bad that one can see through the floor into the
room below. Bugs, but 'I keeps 'em down with sheep dip'. Earth road past
these cottages is like a muck-heap and said to be almost impassable in
winter. Stone lavatories at ends of gardens in semi-ruinous condition.
Tenants have been twenty-two years in this house. Are £11 in arrears
with rent, and have been paying an extra 1s. a week to pay this off.
Landlord now refuses this and has served orders to quit. Rent 5s.,
including rates.


And so on and so on and so on. I could multiply examples by the
score--they could be multiplied by the hundred thousand if anyone chose
to make a house-to-house inspection throughout the industrial districts.
Meanwhile some of the expressions I have used need explaining. 'One up,
one down' means one room on each storey--i.e. a two-roomed house. 'Back
to back' houses are two houses built in one, each side of the house
being somebody's front door, so that if you walk down a row of what is
apparently twelve houses you are in reality seeing not twelve houses but
twenty-four. The front houses give on the street and the back ones on
the yard, and there is only one way out of each house. The effect of
this is obvious. The lavatories are in the yard at the back, so that if
you live on the side facing the street, to get to the lavatory or the
dust-bin you have to go out of the front door and walk round the end of
the block--a distance that may be as much as two hundred yards; if you
live at the back, on the other hand, your outlook is on to a row of
lavatories. There are also houses of what is called the 'blind back'
type, which are single houses, but in which the builder has omitted to
put in a back door--from pure spite, apparently. The windows which
refuse to open are a peculiarity of old mining towns. Some of these
towns are so undermined by ancient workings that the ground is
constantly subsiding and the houses above slip sideways. In Wigan you
pass whole rows of houses which have slid to startling angles, their
windows being ten or twenty degrees out of the horizontal. Sometimes the
front wall bellies outward till it looks as though the house were seven
months gone in pregnancy. It can be refaced, but the new facing soon
begins to bulge again. When a house sinks at all suddenly its windows
are jammed for ever and the door has to be refitted. This excites no
surprise locally. The story of the miner who comes home from work and
finds that he can only get indoors by smashing down the front door with
an axe is considered humorous. In some cases I have noted 'Landlord
good' or 'Landlord bad', because there is great variation in what the
slum-dwellers say about their landlords. I found--one might expect it,
perhaps--that the small landlords are usually the worst. It goes against
the grain to say this, but one can see why it should be so. Ideally, the
worst type of slum landlord is a fat wicked man, preferably a bishop,
who is drawing an immense income from extortionate rents. Actually, it
is a poor old woman who has invested her life's savings in three slum
houses, inhabits one of them, and tries to live on the rent of the other
two--never, in consequence, having any money for repairs.

But mere notes like these are only valuable as reminders to myself. To
me as I read them they bring back what I have seen, but they cannot in
themselves give much idea of what conditions are like in those fearful
northern slums. Words are such feeble things. What is the use of a brief
phrase like 'roof leaks' or 'four beds for eight people'? It is the kind
of thing your eye slides over, registering nothing. And yet what a
wealth of misery it can cover! Take the question of overcrowding, for
instance. Quite often you have eight or even ten people living in a
three-roomed house. One of these rooms is a living-room, and as it
probably measures about a dozen feet square and contains, besides the
kitchen range and the sink, a table, some chairs, and a dresser, there
is no room in it for a bed. So there are eight or ten people sleeping in
two small rooms, probably in at most four beds. If some of these people
are adults and have to go to work, so much the worse. In one house, I
remember, three grown-up girls shared the same bed and all went to work
at different hours, each disturbing the others when she got up or came
in; in another house a young miner working on the night shift slept by
day in a narrow bed in which another member of the family slept by
night. There is an added difficulty when there are grown-up children, in
that you cannot let adolescent youths and girls sleep in the same bed.
In one family I visited there were a father and mother and a son and
daughter aged round about seventeen, and only two beds for the lot of
them. The father slept with the son and the mother with the daughter; it
was the only arrangement that ruled out the danger of incest. Then there
is the misery of leaking roofs and oozing walls, which in winter makes
some rooms almost uninhabitable. Then there are bugs. Once bugs get into
a house they are in it till the crack of doom; there is no sure way of
exterminating them. Then there are the windows that will not open. I
need not point out what this must mean, in summer, in a tiny stuffy
living-room where the fire, on which all the cooking is done, has to be
kept burning more or less constantly. And there are the special miseries
attendant upon back to back houses. A fifty yards' walk to the lavatory
or the dust-bin is not exactly an inducement to be clean. In the front
houses--at any rate in a side-street where the Corporation don't
interfere--the women get into the habit of throwing their refuse out of
the front door, so that the gutter is always littered with tea-leaves
and bread crusts. And it is worth considering what it is like for a
child to grow up in one of the back alleys where its gaze is bounded by
a row of lavatories and a wall.

In such places as these a woman is only a poor drudge muddling among an
infinity of jobs. She may keep up her spirits, but she cannot keep up
her standards of cleanliness and tidiness. There is always something to
be done, and no conveniences and almost literally not room to turn
round. No sooner have you washed one child's face than another's is
dirty; before you have washed the crocks from one meal the next is due
to be cooked. I found great variation in the houses I visited. Some were
as decent as one could possibly expect in the circumstances, some were
so appalling that I have no hope of describing them adequately. To begin
with, the smell, the dominant and essential thing, is indescribable. But
the squalor and the confusion! A tub full of filthy water here, a basin
full of unwashed crocks there, more crocks piled in any odd corner, torn
newspaper littered everywhere, and in the middle always the same
dreadful table covered with sticky oilcloth and crowded with cooking
pots and irons and half-darned stockings and pieces of stale bread and
bits of cheese wrapped round with greasy newspaper! And the congestion
in a tiny room where getting from one side to the other is a complicated
voyage between pieces of furniture, with a line of damp washing getting
you in the face every time you move and the children as thick underfoot
as toadstools! There are scenes that stand out vividly in my memory. The
almost bare living-room of a cottage in a little mining village, where
the whole family was out of work and everyone seemed to be underfed; and
the big family of grown-up sons and daughters sprawling aimlessly about,
all strangely alike with red hair, splendid bones, and pinched faces
ruined by malnutrition and idleness; and one tall son sitting by the
fire-place, too listless even to notice the entry of a stranger, and
slowly peeling a sticky sock from a bare foot. A dreadful room in Wigan
where all the furniture seemed to be made of packing cases and barrel
staves and was coming to pieces at that; and an old woman with a
blackened neck and her hair coining down denouncing her landlord in a
Lancashire-Irish accent; and her mother, aged well over ninety, sitting
in the background on the barrel that served her as a commode and
regarding us blankly with a yellow, cretinous face. I could fill up
pages with memories of similar interiors.

Of course the squalor of these people's houses is some-times their own
fault. Even if you live in a back to back house and have four children
and a total income of thirty-two and sixpence a week from the P.A.C.,
there is no need to have unemptied chamber-pots standing about in your
living-room. But it is equally certain that their circumstances do not
encourage self-respect. The determining factor is probably the number of
children. The best-kept interiors I saw were always childless houses or
houses where there were only one or two children; with, say, six
children in a three-roomed house it is quite impossible to keep anything
decent. One thing that is very noticeable is that the worst squalors are
never downstairs. You might visit quite a number of houses, even among
the poorest of the unemployed, and bring away a wrong impression. These
people, you might reflect, cannot be so badly off if they still have a
fair amount of furniture and crockery. But it is in the rooms upstairs
that the gauntness of poverty really discloses itself. Whether this is
because pride makes people cling to their living-room furniture to the
last, or because bedding is more pawnable, I do not know, but certainly
many of the bedrooms I saw were fearful places. Among people who have
been unemployed for several years continuously I should say it is the
exception to have anything like a full set of bedclothes. Often there is
nothing that can be properly called bedclothes at all--just a heap of
old overcoats and miscellaneous rags on a rusty iron bedstead. In this
way overcrowding is aggravated. One family of four persons that I knew,
a father and mother and two children, possessed two beds but could only
use one of them because they had not enough bedding for the other.

Anyone who wants to see the effects of the housing shortage at their
very worse should visit the dreadful caravan-dwellings that exist in
numbers in many of the northern towns. Ever since the war, in the
complete impossibility of getting houses, parts of the population have
overflowed into supposedly temporary quarters in fixed caravans. Wigan,
for instance, with a population of about 85,000, has round about 200
caravan-dwellings with a family in each--perhaps somewhere near 1000
people in all. How many of these caravan-colonies exist throughout the
industrial areas it would be difficult to discover with any accuracy.
The local authorities are reticent about them and the census report of
1931 seems to have decided to ignore them. But so far as I can discover
by inquiry they are to be found in most of the larger towns in
Lancashire and Yorkshire, and perhaps further north as well. The
probability is that throughout the north of England there are some
thousands, perhaps tens of thousands of _families_ (not individuals) who
have no home except a fixed caravan.

But the word 'caravan' is very misleading. It calls up a picture of a
cosy gypsy-encampment (in fine weather, of course) with wood fires
crackling and children picking blackberries and many-coloured washing
fluttering on the lines. The caravan-colonies in Wigan and Sheffield are
not like that. I had a look at several of them, I inspected those in
Wigan with considerable care, and I have never seen comparable squalor
except in the Far East. Indeed when I saw them I was immediately
reminded of the filthy kennels in which I have seen Indian coolies
living in Burma. But, as a matter of fact, nothing in the East could
ever be quite as bad, for in the East you haven't our clammy,
penetrating cold to contend with, and the sun is a disinfectant.

Along the banks of Wigan's miry canal are patches of waste ground on
which the caravans have been dumped like rubbish shot out of a bucket.
Some of them are actually gypsy caravans, but very old ones and in bad
repair. The majority are old single-decker buses (the rather smaller
buses of ten years ago) which have been taken off their wheels and
propped up with struts of wood. Some are simply wagons with
semi-circular slats on top, over which canvas is stretched, so that the
people inside have nothing but canvas between them and the outer air.
Inside, these places are usually about five feet wide by six high (I
could not stand quite upright in any of them) and anything from six to
fifteen feet long. Some, I suppose, are inhabited by only one person,
but I did not see any that held less than two persons, and some of them
contained large families. One, for instance, measuring fourteen feet
long, had seven people in it--seven people in about 450 cubic feet of
space; which is to say that each person had for his entire dwelling a
space a _good deal_ smaller than one compartment of a public lavatory.
The dirt and congestion of these places is such that you cannot well
imagine it unless you have tested it with your own eyes and more
particularly your nose. Each contains a tiny cottage kitchener and such
furniture as can be crammed in--sometimes two beds, more usually one,
into which the whole family have to huddle as best they can. It is
almost impossible to sleep on the floor, because the damp soaks up from
below. I was shown mat-tresses which were still wringing wet at eleven
in the morning. In winter it is so cold that the kitcheners have to be
kept burning day and night, and the windows, need-less to say, are never
opened. Water is got from a hydrant common to the whole colony, some of
the caravan-dwellers having to walk 150 or 200 yards for every bucket of
water. There are no sanitary arrangements at all. Most of the people
construct a little hut to serve as a lavatory on the tiny patch of
ground surrounding their caravan, and once a week dig a deep hole in
which to bury the refuse. All the people I saw in these places,
especially the children, were unspeakably dirty, and I do not doubt that
they were lousy as well. They could not possibly be otherwise. The
thought that haunted me as I went from caravan to caravan was, What can
happen in those cramped interiors when anybody dies? But that, of
course, is the kind of question you hardly care to ask.

Some of the people have been in their caravans for many years.
Theoretically the Corporation are doing away with the caravan-colonies
and getting the inhabitants out into houses; but as the houses don't get
built, the caravans remain standing. Most of the people I talked to had
given up the idea of ever getting a decent habitation again. They were
all out of work, and a job and a house seemed to them about equally
remote and impossible. Some hardly seemed to care; others realized quite
clearly in what misery they were living. One woman's face stays by me, a
worn skull-like face on which was a look of intolerable misery and
degradation. I gathered that in that dreadful pigsty, struggling to keep
her large brood of children clean, she felt as I should feel if I were
coated all over with dung. One must remember that these people are not
gypsies; they are decent English people who have all, except the
children born there, had homes of their own in their day; besides, their
caravans are greatly inferior to those of gypsies and they have not the
great advantage of being on the move. No doubt there are still
middle-class people who think that the Lower Orders don't mind that kind
of thing and who, if they happened to pass a caravan-colony in the
train, would immediately assume that the people lived there from choice.
I never argue nowadays with that kind of person. But it is worth
noticing that the caravan-dwellers don't even save money by living
there, for they are paying about the same rents as they would for
houses. I could not hear of any rent lower than five shillings a week
(five shillings for 200 cubic feet of space!) and there are even cases
where the rent is as high as ten shillings. Somebody must be making a
good thing out of those caravans! But dearly their continued existence
is due to the housing shortage and not directly to poverty.

Talking once with a miner I asked him when the housing shortage first
became acute in his district; he answered, 'When we were told about it',
meaning that till recently people's standards were so low that they took
almost any degree of overcrowding for granted. He added that when he was
a child his family had slept eleven in a room and thought nothing of it,
and that later, when he was grown-up, he and his wife had lived in one
of the old-style back to back houses in which you not only had to walk a
couple of hundred yards to the lavatory but often had to wait in a queue
when you got there, the lavatory being shared by thirty-six people. And
when his wife was sick with the illness that killed her, she still had
to make that two hundred yards' journey to the lavatory. This, he said,
was the kind of thing people would put up with 'till they were told
about it'.

I do not know whether that is true. What is certain is that nobody now
thinks it bearable to sleep eleven in a room, and that even people with
comfortable incomes are vaguely troubled by the thought of 'the slums'.
Hence the clatter about 'rehousing' and 'slum clearance' which we have
had at intervals ever since the war. Bishops, politicians,
philanthropists, and what not enjoy talking piously about 'slum
clearance', because they can thus divert attention from more serious
evils and pretend that if you abolish the slums you abolish poverty. But
all this talk has led to surprisingly small results. So far as one can
discover, the congestion is no better, perhaps slightly worse, than it
was a dozen years ago. There is certainly great variation in the speed
at which the different towns are attacking their housing problem. In
some towns building seems to be almost at a standstill, in others it is
proceeding rapidly and the private landlord is being driven out of
business. Liverpool, for instance, has been very largely rebuilt, mainly
by the efforts of the Corporation. Sheffield, too, is being torn down
and rebuilt pretty fast, though perhaps, considering the unparalleled
beastliness of its slums, not quite fast enough.[The number of
Corporation houses in process of construction in Sheffield at the
beginning of 1936 was 1398. To replace the slum areas entirely Sheffield
is said to need 100,000 houses.]

Why rehousing has on the whole moved so slowly, and why some towns can
borrow money for building purposes so much more easily than others, I do
not know. Those questions would have to be answered by someone who knows
more about the machinery of local government than I do. A Corporation
house costs normally somewhere between three and four hundred pounds; it
costs rather less when it is built by 'direct labour' than when built by
contract. The rent of these houses would average something over twenty
pounds a year not counting rates, so one would think that, even allowing
for overhead expenses and interest on loans, it would pay any
Corporation to build as many houses as could be tenanted. In many cases,
of course, the houses would have to be inhabited by people on the
P.A.C., so that the local bodies would merely be taking money out of one
pocket and putting it into another--i.e. paying out money in the form of
relief and taking it back in the form of rent. But they have got to pay
the relief in any case, and at present a proportion of what they pay is
being swallowed up by private landlords. The reasons given for the slow
rate of building are lack of money and the difficulty of getting hold of
sites--for Corporation houses are not erected piecemeal but in
'estates', sometimes of hundreds of houses at a time. One thing that
always strikes me as mysterious is that so many of the northern towns
see fit to build themselves immense and luxurious public buildings at
the same time as they are in crying need of dwelling houses. The town of
Barnsley, for instance, recently spent close on £150,000 on a new town
hall, although admittedly needing at least 2000 new working-class
houses, not to mention public baths. (The public baths in Barnsley
contain nineteen men's slipper baths--this in a town of 70,000
inhabitants, largely miners, not one of whom has a bath in his house!)
For £150,000 it could have built 350 Corporation houses and still had
£10,000 to spend on a town hall. However, as I say, I do not pretend to
understand the mysteries of local government. I merely record the fact
that houses are desperately needed and are being built, on the whole,
with paralytic slowness.

Still, houses are being built, and the Corporation building estates,
with their row upon row of little red houses, all much liker than two.
peas (where did that expression come from? Peas have great
individuality) are a regular feature of the outskirts of the industrial
towns. As to what they are like and how they compare with the slum
houses, I can best give an idea by transcribing two more extracts from
my diary. The tenants' opinions of their houses vary greatly, so I will
give one favourable extract and one unfavourable. Both of these are from
Wigan and both are the cheaper 'non-parlour type' houses:


1. House in Beech Hill Estate.

_Downstairs_. Large living-room with kitchener fireplace, cup-boards,
and fixed dresser, composition floor. Small hallway, largish kitchen. Up
to date electric cooker hired from Corporation at much the same rate as
a gas cooker.

_Upstairs_. Two largish bedrooms, one tiny one--suitable only for a
boxroom or temporary bedroom. Bathroom, w.c., with hot and cold water.

Smallish garden. These vary throughout the estate, but mostly rather
smaller than an allotment.

Four in family, parents and two children. Husband in good employ. Houses
appear well built and are quite agreeable to look at. Various
restrictions, e.g. it is forbidden to keep poultry or pigeons, take in
lodgers, sub-let, or start any kind of business with-out leave from the
Corporation. (This is easily granted in the case of taking in lodgers,
but not in any of the others.) Tenant' very well satisfied with house
and proud of it. Houses in this estate all well kept. Corporation are
good about repairs, but keep tenants up to the mark with regard to
keeping the place tidy, etc.

Rent 11s. 3d. including rates. Bus fare into town 2d.


2. House in Welly Estate.

_Downstairs_. Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, kitchen a good deal smaller,
tiny larder under stairs, small but fairly good bathroom. Gas cooker,
electric lighting. Outdoor w.c.

_Upstairs_. One bedroom 12 ft by 10 ft with tiny fireplace, another the
same size without fireplace, another 7 ft by 6 ft. Best bedroom has
small wardrobe let into wall. 'Garden about 20 yards by 10.

Six in family, parents and four children, eldest son nineteen, eldest
daughter twenty-two. None in work except eldest son. Tenants very
discontented. Their complaints are: 'House is cold, draughty, and damp.
Fireplace in living-room gives out no heat and makes room very
dusty--attributed to its being set too low. Fireplace in best bedroom
too small to be of any use. Walls upstairs cracking. Owing to
uselessness of tiny bedroom, five are sleeping in one bedroom, one (the
eldest son) in the other.'

Gardens in this estate all neglected.

Rent 10s. 3d., inclusive. Distance to town a little over a mile--there
is no bus here.


I could multiply examples, but these two are enough, as the types of
Corporation houses being built do not vary greatly from place to place.
Two things are immediately obvious. The first is that at their very
worst the Corporation houses are better than the slums they replace. The
mere possession of a bathroom and a bit of garden would out-weigh almost
any disadvantage. The other is that they are much more expensive to live
in. It is common enough for a man to be turned out of a condemned house
where he is paying six or seven shillings a week and given a Corporation
house where he has to pay ten. This only affects those who are in work
or have recently been in work, because when a man is on the P.A.C. his
rent is assessed at a quarter of his dole, and if it is more than this
he gets an extra allowance; in any case, there are certain classes of
Corporation houses to which people on the dole are not admitted. But
there are other ways in which life in a Corporation estate is expensive,
whether you are in work or out of it. To begin with, owing to the higher
rents, the shops in the estate are much more expensive and there are not
so many of them. Then again, in a comparatively large, detached house,
away from the frowsy huddle of the slum, it is much colder and more fuel
has to be burnt. And again there is the expense, especially for a man in
work, of getting to and from town. This last is one of the more obvious
problems of rehousing. Slum clearance means diffusion of the population.
When you rebuild on a large scale, what you do in effect is to scoop out
the centre of the town and redistribute it on the outskirts. This is all
very well in a way; you have got the people out of fetid alleys into
places where they have room to breathe; but from the point of view of
the people themselves, what you have done is to pick them up and dump
them down five miles from their work. The simplest solution is flats. If
people are going to live in large towns at all they must learn to live
on top of one another. But the northern working people do not take
kindly to flats; even where fiats exist they are contemptuously named
'tenements'. Almost everyone will tell you that he 'wants a house of his
own', and apparently a house in the middle of an unbroken block of
houses a hundred yards long seems to them more 'their own' than a flat
situated in mid-air.

To revert to the second of the two Corporation houses I have just
mentioned. The tenant complained that the house was cold, damp, and so
forth. Perhaps the house was jerry-built, but equally probably he was
exaggerating. He had come there from a filthy hovel in the middle of
Wigan which I happened to have inspected previously; while there he had
made every effort to get hold of a Corporation house, and he was no
sooner in the Corporation house than he wanted to be back in the slum.
This looks like mere captiousness but it covers a perfectly genuine
grievance. In very many cases, perhaps in half the cases, I found that
the people in Corporation houses don't really like them. They are glad
to get out of the stink of the slum, they know that it is better for
their children to have space to play about in, but they don't feel
really at home. The exceptions are usually people in good employ who can
afford to spend a little extra on fuel and furniture and journeys, and
who in any case are of 'superior' type. The others, the typical
slum-dwellers, miss the frowsy warmth of the slum. They complain that
'out in the country', i.e. on the edge of the town, they are 'starving'
(freezing). Certainly most Corporation estates are pretty bleak in
winter. Some I have been through, perched on treeless clayey hillsides
and swept by icy winds, would be horrible places to live in. It is not
that slum-dwellers want dirt and congestion for their own sakes, as the
fat-bellied bourgeoisie love to believe. (See for instance the
conversation about slum-clearance in Galsworthy's Swan Song, where the
rentier's cherished belief that the slum-dweller makes the slum, and not
vice versa, is put into the mouth of a philanthropic Jew.) Give people a
decent house and they will soon learn to keep it decent. Moreover, with
a smart-looking house to live up to they improve in self-respect and
cleanliness, and their children start life with better chances.
Nevertheless, in a Corporation estate there is an uncomfortable, almost
prison-like atmosphere, and the people who live there are perfectly well
aware of it.

And it is here that one comes on the central difficulty of the housing
problem. When you walk through the smoke-dim slums of Manchester you
think that nothing is needed except to tear down these abominations and
build decent houses in their place. But the trouble is that in
destroying the slum you destroy other things as well. Houses are I'
desperately needed and are not being built fast enough; but in so far as
rehousing is being done, it is being done--perhaps it is unavoidable--in
a monstrously inhuman 'manner. I don't mean merely that the houses are
new and ugly. All houses have got to be new at some time, and as a
matter of fact the type of Corporation house now being built is not at
all offensive to look at. On the outskirts of Liverpool there are what
amount to whole towns consisting entirely of Corporation houses, and
they are quite pleasing to the eye; the blocks of workers' flats in the
centre of the town modelled, I believe, on the workers' flats in Vienna,
are definitely fine buildings. But there is something ruthless and
soulless about the whole business. Take, for instance, the restrictions
with which you are burdened in a Corporation house. You are not allowed
to keep your house and garden as you want them--in some estates there is
even a regulation that every garden must have the same kind of hedge.
You are not allowed to keep poultry or pigeons. The Yorkshire miners are
fond of keeping homer pigeons; they keep them in the back yard and take
them out and race them on Sundays. But pigeons are messy birds and the
Corporation suppresses them as a matter of course. The restrictions
about shops are more serious. The number of shops in a Corporation
estate is rigidly limited, and it is said that preference is given to
the Co-op and the chain stores; this may not be strictly true, but
certainly those are the shops that one usually sees there. This is bad
enough for the general public, but from the point of view of the
independent shopkeeper it is a disaster. Many a small shopkeeper is
utterly ruined by some rehousing scheme which takes no notice of his
existence. A whole section of the town is condemned en bloc; presently
the houses are pulled down and the people are transferred to some
housing estate miles away. In this way all the small shopkeepers of the
quarter have their whole clientele taken away from them at a single
swoop and receive not a penny of compensation. They cannot transfer
their business to the estate, because even if they can afford the move
and the much higher rents, they would probably be refused a licence. As
for pubs, they are banished from the housing estates almost completely,
and the few that remain are dismal sham-Tudor places fitted out by the
big brewery companies and very expensive. For a middle-class population
this would be a nuisance--it might mean walking a mile to get a glass of
beer; for a working-class population, which uses the pub as a kind of
club, it is a serious blow at communal life. It is a great achievement
to get slum-dwellers into decent houses, but it is unfortunate that,
owing to the peculiar temper of our time, it is also considered
necessary to rob them of the last vestiges of their liberty. The people
themselves feel this, and it is this feeling that they are rationalizing
when they complain that their new houses--so much better, as houses,
than those they have come out of--are cold and uncomfortable and
'unhomelike'.

I sometimes think that the price of liberty is not so much eternal
vigilance as eternal dirt. There are some Corporation estates in which
new tenants are systematically de-loused before being allowed into their
houses. All their possessions except what they stand up in are taken
away from them, fumigated, and sent on to the new house. This procedure
has its points, for it is a pity that people should take bugs into brand
new houses (a bug will follow you about in your luggage if he gets half
a chance), but it is the kind of thing that makes you wish that the word
'hygiene' could be dropped out of the dictionary. Bugs are bad, but a
state of affairs in which men will allow themselves to be dipped like
sheep is worse. 'Perhaps, however, when it is a case of slum clearance,
one must take for granted a certain amount of restrictions and
inhumanity. When all is said and done, the most important thing is that
people shall live in decent houses and not in pigsties. I have seen too
much of slums to go into Chestertonian raptures about them. A place
where the children can breathe clean air, and women have a few
conveniences to save them from drudgery, and a man has a bit of garden
to dig in, must be better than the stinking back-streets of Leeds and
Sheffield. On balance, the Corporation Estates are better than the
slums; but only by a small margin.

When I was looking into the housing question I visited and inspected
numbers of houses, perhaps a hundred or two hundred houses altogether,
in various mining towns and villages. I cannot end this chapter without
remarking on the extraordinary courtesy and good nature with which I was
received everywhere. I did not go alone--I always had some local friend
among the unemployed to show me round--but even so, it is an
impertinence to go poking into strangers' houses and asking to see the
cracks in the bedroom wall. Yet everyone was astonishingly patient and
seemed to understand almost without explanation why I was questioning
them and what I wanted to see. If any unauthorized person walked into
_my_ house and began asking me whether the roof leaked and whether I was
much troubled by bugs and what I thought of my landlord, I should
probably tell him to go to hell. This only happened to me once, and in
that case the woman was slightly deaf and took me for a Means Test nark;
but even she relented after a while and gave me the information I
wanted.

I am told that it is bad form for a writer to quote his own reviews, but
I want here to contradict a reviewer in the _Manchester Guardian_ who
says apropos of one of my books:


Set down in Wigan or Whitechapel Mr Orwell would still exercise an
unerring power of closing his vision to all that is good in order to
proceed with his wholehearted vilification of humanity.


Wrong. Mr Orwell was 'set down' in Wigan for quite a while and it did
not inspire him with any wish to vilify humanity. He liked Wigan very
much--the people, not the scenery. Indeed, he has only one fault to find
with it, and that is in respect of the celebrated Wigan Pier, which he
had set his heart on seeing. Alas! Wigan Pier had been demolished, and
even the spot where it used to stand is no longer certain.